World War II Remembered is a multi-year exhibition currently on display at the Eisenhower Presidential Museum.  The 
article  that  follows  is  a  special  feature  of  this  exhibition,  the  sixth  in  a  series  created  to  honor  and  educate  about  the 
generation  that  won  World  War  II.    Featured  are  the  stories  of  real  people  from  the  “World  War  II  Participants  and 
Contemporaries” collection, held and preserved in the archives of the Eisenhower Presidential Library.   
 

     Dr. Maxwell Glen Berry  
     Mission, Kansas 
     U.S. Army, Pacific Theater 
 

“Every  adult  American  alive  that  day  remembers 
where he heard the news of Pearl Harbor.  I heard it 
on my way home from Sunday rounds at St. Luke’s 
Hospital  in  Kansas  City. 
  The  Japanese  had 
destroyed most of our fleet by a sneak attack without 
declaring  war.    Their  success  in  such  a  large 
mission, together with our demonstrated ineptitude, 
made  invasion  of  our  mainland and  even our total 
military defeat terrifying possibilities.  
 
Josephine and I sat up long after our two kids were 
in  bed  that  night.    We  agreed  that  I  had  no  other 
choice  than  to  do  whatever  I  could  to  defend  our 
country and our family.” 

Maxwell Berry 
                 Lieutenant Colonel Medical Corps A.U.S. 
One Man’s WW II  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

I 

n the spring of 1937, Maxwell G. Berry, M.D. was a 
newly minted physician, and the odds for succeeding 
had  not  been in  his  favor.    At  a  time  when  graduating 
college was rare enough, he had managed to become a 
doctor—all against a backdrop of the Great Depression.  
When  the  stock  market  crashed  on  October  29,  1929, 
Max  was just  20  years  old.    At  the  time,  he  could not 
have known that circumstances, far beyond his control, 
would complicate his life for nearly two decades.  For, 
just  as  he  was  settling—very  happily!—into  a  well-

deserved  adult  life,  epic  global  events  intervened  and, 
once again, he was swept along with them.   

Maxwell  Glen  Berry  was  born  on  a  Monday,  April  5, 
1909, in Virgil, Kansas, a tiny town nestled in the Flint 
Hills,  a  vestige  of  the  once-magnificent  tall-grass 
prairies.    “Max,”  the  second  of  six  children,  was  the 
oldest  son  of  William  Glenny  and  Mamie  Dehlinger 
Berry.  Along with his parents, two formative influences 
in  his  life  were  his  paternal  grandfather,  Alexander, 
himself  a  physician 
in  early  Kansas,  and  his 
grandmother,  Mary.    She  was  a  powerful  presence, 
encouraging lofty life’s goals for her grandchildren.  One 
can only imagine her profound sense of accomplishment 
on  June  12,  1933,  as  she  proudly  watched  three 
grandsons  awarded  diplomas  from  the  University  of 
Kansas.   

the  next 

Over 
four  years,  Max  engaged  his 
resourcefulness,  determination,  and  solid  work  ethic  in 
order to complete the rest of his medical training.  Back 
home, his father had “lost a small fortune” trading cattle, 
and jobs were virtually nonexistent.  In the agricultural 
heartland  of  the  country,  hard  times  were  further 
exacerbated by the Dust Bowl.  Grabbing up any job he 
could find,  Max  earned  tuition  money  in  the summers.  
Following  an 
internship  at  Tulane  University,  he 
completed  his  medical  residency  at  the  University  of 
Kansas.  Dreams of a bright future, now so near,  were 

turned  upside  down  on  December  7,  1941.    A  married 
father of two with a fledgling medical practice, Max did 
not have to think about it twice—he would do what he 
could to help win the war. 

On  May  10,  1942,  Captain  Maxwell  G.  Berry,  M.D., 
entered  active  duty  in  the  U.S.  Army;  he  would  serve 
until November 14, 1945, by then promoted to lieutenant 
colonel.  From Max’s military separation papers, dated 
March 1, 1946, we know his eyes and hair were brown, 
and that he stood 5’9,” weighing a slender 165 pounds.  
Overseas duty began in August of 1943 and, at the time 
of  his  departure  for  home  in  October  1945,  he  was 
serving in the southern Philippines.  As Chief of Medical 
Service, Max served in the 117th Station Hospital and the 
133rd 
General 
We have about double our full 
Hospital  in  Australia, 
quota of patients, and they are 
New  Guinea,  and  the 
sick . . . it’s a pleasure to take 
southern  Philippines.   
care of these young men who 
don’t ask favors . . . .”   
Here  he  developed 
expertise 
and  new 
protocols  for  treating 
 
tropical  diseases  and 
 
served  as an  invaluable  consultant  in tropical  medicine 
with the 29th Hospital Center in Leyte, Philippines.   

Letter to Josephine 
November 21, 1943 

While  he  was  overseas,  Max  and  his  wife  Josephine 
wrote one another daily.   From these letters, addressed 
“Dearest Josephine” (later shortened to “DJ”), emerges a 
colorful account of life for the doctors who served in the 
Pacific.  Max and Josephine were clearly a well-matched 
and affectionate couple who had cherished a life together 
prior to the war.  On February 21, 1945, Max poured out 
his heart, “Our anniversary.  Here’s how I feel now.  In 
the last 19 months, I have missed more happiness than 
most  men  have  in  a  lifetime  .  .  .  .”    It  is  with  this 
collection  of  letters  in  hand  that  Max  eventually  wrote 
WW II:  One Man’s War in 1948, a captivating memoir 
of his World War II.  
 
Not only did the first doctors to the Pacific Theater live 
in  tents  with  dirt  floors  and  sleep  on  cots—they  were 
expected  to  construct  their  own  hospitals!    As  housing 
conditions 
tin  roofs, 
screened-in  walls,  wooden  floors,  and  electric  lights.  
Conditions were particularly challenging for the doctors, 
nurses,  and  patients  because  of  the  oppressive  heat, 
humidity,  and  a  veritable  parade  of  sometimes  self-

improved,  Max  marveled  at 

  All 

this, 

“It’s so hot outside, 
sweat comes out like 
water out of a 
squeezed wet sponge.” 
Letter to Josephine 
April 4, 1944 

high-ranking 
important, 
visitors. 
in 
combination  with  frequent 
downpours, knee-deep mud, 
and 
impenetrable, 
mountainous 
terrain, 
complicated  the  difficulty  of  every  task.    The  most 
serious  problem  by  far,  however,  was  the  ever-present 
threat  of  the  ubiquitous tropical diseases.   Malaria was 
endemic and particularly devastating.  In 1942 alone, it 
affected one of every three soldiers.  Max’s dictum was 
absolute:  hospital facilities must be kept insect-free, and 
everyone was administered a daily dose of Atabrine, an 
anti-malarial drug.  Noncompliance was deadly.  

 

from 

Doctors in the South Pacific made do with second-rate 
medical  supplies  and  chronic  shortages  of  life-saving 
medicines—generally  castoffs 
the  European 
Theater.      Max  agonized  over  one  especially  tragic 
case—a  young  soldier  afflicted  with  gas  gangrene.  
Because all available antibiotics had been routed to the 
European Theater to counter a gonorrhea epidemic, Max 
had to break the devastating news to the young man that 
there was no choice but to amputate both his arms.  

Arriving home in November 1945, Max rejoiced, “home 
was  as  near  Heaven  as  I  ever  hope  to  be.”    Belatedly, 
and after much administrative wrangling, he received a 
Bronze  Star  for  “meritorious  achievement  in  Leyte, 
Philippines.”    The  war  now  over,  Max,  age  36,  had  to 
start  his  medical  practice  all  over  again.    Nonetheless, 
many  decades  later,  he  must  have  looked  back  and 
marveled  that  he  had  made  it!    Despite  a  contagion  of 
events that seemed ever determined to thwart his dreams 
and  dash    his  hard  work,  he  had prevailed.    Following 
the war, Max practiced internal medicine for more than 
50  years,  rising  to  prestigious  leadership  and  teaching 
positions  at  both  the  University  of  Kansas  Medical 
School and the University of Missouri at Kansas City’s 
Medical  School.    Max  and  Josephine’s  family  would 
eventually expand to four children:  William, Jane, John, 
and  Barbara.    Dr.  Maxwell  Glen  Berry,  World  War  II 
veteran, died on August 18, 2004, at the age of 95.  He is 
exemplary  of  the  generation  that,  having  survived  the 
Great  Depression,  would  face  down—and  defeat!—the 
greatest threat to liberty in the 20th century.  

